## Metadata Structure in WaM-DaM
Metadata are the ancillary information about data that helps users correctly and unambiguously interpret the meanings of data values. Metadata keep the data provenance that is needed to track the history and context of data like the sources, methods, people and organizations that contributed to create a data value (Campbell et al., 2013; Carata et al., 2014; DCMI, 2013; Goodman et al., 2014; Gray et al., 2005; Horsburgh et al., 2008; Pokorný, 2006). 

Metadata also help users asses the reliability, trustworthiness, and quality of data (Moreau and Missier, 2013). Several of the reviewed methods tend to only document units metadata which are important in modeling to keep track of quantities to maintain conservation of mass and energy. Other metadata like methods and sources are usually overlooked since they are not directly used in modeling algorithms. Thus users may document their sources and methods separately in reports or just keep them verbally.  

WaM-DaM strived to adapt the relevant metadata elements within the context of system analysis and tries to balance between the principles and practicality as recommended by Duval et al. (2002). Too much metadata can be overwhelming to users and too little metadata can be insufficient to correctly interpret data. WaM-DaM design is also driven by the key questions that users want to answer and example uses cases. 

Thus, WaM-DaM supports these metadata tables: the providing source of an attribute data values, the method of collecting data values of an attribute and whether there is modeling in generating data values, the organization and people who generate methods and serve as sources, and the unit of data values of an attribute. Other metadata elements may be incorporated to future WaM-DaM designs based on the needs of water resources community. 

A defined explicit structure of metadata (e.g., sources, methods) guide users to consistently document their metadata. A consistent metadata structure also helps users to access metadata directly and re-uses it to describe data values where applicable. Here we elaborate on each of these metadata constructs. 


### Source
First, a data source refers to the data provider and where quantitative or qualitative data values of an attribute came. A source can also be associated with a person who belongs to an organization that provided the data. 

An organization refers to the institution that affiliates a person who generates data using a method or provides it as a source. A method refers to how a quantitative or qualitative data values of an attribute where created or generated and by whom. Similar to the data source, a method can be associated with a Person and an Organization. The person who provides the data in an organization is not necessary the same person who generates the data. For example, the source organization that provides the maximum storage capacity of a reservoir can be the National Atlas of the United States. However, the organization that developed the method and estimated the capacity is the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.

### Method
A Method also has a type which is a controlled vocabulary term that can be like sample, simulation, optimization, or field procedure. The method type corresponds to “value type” attribute in the Observations Data Model (Horsburgh et al., 2008). If the method type is simulation or optimization, users can further populate metadata about the simulation or optimization in the models table, described next.

### Model
A Model in WaM-DaM refers to a statistical or mathematical representation of a water system and the model table helps users track data provided as input to the model or generated by the model as output. A Model instance (not to confuse with an instance of an object) refers to a mathematical or statistical representation of a particular water system in a particular area and time span in specific modeling software (e.g., Lower Bear River Water Management Model in WEAP). Water managers and researchers can consider importing existing simulation results as input data to their own models. 

### Connections and Vertices 
A Link instance must reference different start and end node instances that are already populated in the Instances table. Future work can implement software business rules to maintain the integrity of network connectivity by enforcing the rules above. Additional software business rules on connections can constraint what Object Types can connect with what node Object Types. For example, a “wastewater pipe” link Object Type can only connect to a list of node Object Types like a house node, but it cannot connect to “drinking water supply” node. If the user wants to specify a bi-directional link, they can add a second Connections instance in the opposite direction that reverses the start and end nodes. 

To specify more complicated seasonal flow directions, the user can define a customized Object Type with link topology that has a “Flow Direction” attribute. For examples, water utilities can pump water uphill to a storage tank in the winter and release it downhill in the summer through the same pipe. So modelers can use the customized flow direction attribute to indicate flow directions with time by using seasonal values like “with” or “against” the flow direction defined in the Connection table by the start and end nodes.

A link can have vertices to allow virtual discretizing of the same link to follow geo-referenced representation on of points along the link. 

### Native Object/Attribute Categories 


